This book is largely concerned with Hobbits, and from its 
pages a reader may discover much of their character and a
little of their history. Further information will also be found
in the selection from the Red Book of Westmarch that has
already been published, under the title of The Hobbit. That
story was derived from the earlier chapters of the Red Book,
composed by Bilbo himself, the first Hobbit to become
famous in the world at large, and called by him There and
Back Again, since they told of his journey into the East and
his return: an adventure which later involved all the Hobbits
in the great events of that Age that are here related.
Many, however, may wish to know more about this remarkable
people from the outset, while some may not possess
the earlier book. For such readers a few notes on the more
important points are here collected from Hobbit-lore, and
the first adventure is briefly recalled.
Hobbits are an unobtrusive but very ancient people, more
numerous formerly than they are today; for they love peace
and quiet and good tilled earth: a well-ordered and wellfarmed
countryside was their favourite haunt. They do not
and did not understand or like machines more complicated
than a forge-bellows, a water-mill, or a hand-loom, though
they were skilful with tools. Even in ancient days they
were, as a rule, shy of ‘the Big Folk’, as they call us, and
now they avoid us with dismay and are becoming hard to
find. They are quick of hearing and sharp-eyed, and though
they are inclined to be fat and do not hurry unnecessarily, they
are nonetheless nimble and deft in their movements. They
2 prologue
possessed from the first the art of disappearing swiftly and
silently, when large folk whom they do not wish to meet come
blundering by; and this art they have developed until to Men
it may seem magical. But Hobbits have never, in fact, studied
magic of any kind, and their elusiveness is due solely to
a professional skill that heredity and practice, and a close
friendship with the earth, have rendered inimitable by bigger
and clumsier races.
For they are a little people, smaller than Dwarves: less stout
and stocky, that is, even when they are not actually much
shorter. Their height is variable, ranging between two and
four feet of our measure. They seldom now reach three feet;
but they have dwindled, they say, and in ancient days they
were taller. According to the Red Book, Bandobras Took
(Bullroarer), son of Isumbras the Third, was four foot five
and able to ride a horse. He was surpassed in all Hobbit
records only by two famous characters of old; but that curious
matter is dealt with in this book.
As for the Hobbits of the Shire, with whom these tales are
concerned, in the days of their peace and prosperity they
were a merry folk. They dressed in bright colours, being
notably fond of yellow and green; but they seldom wore
shoes, since their feet had tough leathery soles and were clad
in a thick curling hair, much like the hair of their heads, which
was commonly brown. Thus, the only craft little practised
among them was shoe-making; but they had long and skilful
fingers and could make many other useful and comely things.
Their faces were as a rule good-natured rather than beautiful,
broad, bright-eyed, red-cheeked, with mouths apt to
laughter, and to eating and drinking. And laugh they did, and
eat, and drink, often and heartily, being fond of simple jests
at all times, and of six meals a day (when they could get
them). They were hospitable and delighted in parties, and in
presents, which they gave away freely and eagerly accepted.
It is plain indeed that in spite of later estrangement Hobbits
are relatives of ours: far nearer to us than Elves, or even than
Dwarves. Of old they spoke the languages of Men, after their
prologue 3
own fashion, and liked and disliked much the same things as
Men did. But what exactly our relationship is can no longer
be discovered. The beginning of Hobbits lies far back in the
Elder Days that are now lost and forgotten. Only the Elves
still preserve any records of that vanished time, and their
traditions are concerned almost entirely with their own history,
in which Men appear seldom and Hobbits are not mentioned
at all. Yet it is clear that Hobbits had, in fact, lived
quietly in Middle-earth for many long years before other folk
became even aware of them. And the world being after all
full of strange creatures beyond count, these little people
seemed of very little importance. But in the days of Bilbo,
and of Frodo his heir, they suddenly became, by no wish of
their own, both important and renowned, and troubled the
counsels of the Wise and the Great.
Those days, the Third Age of Middle-earth, are now long
past, and the shape of all lands has been changed; but the
regions in which Hobbits then lived were doubtless the same
as those in which they still linger: the North-West of the Old
World, east of the Sea. Of their original home the Hobbits
in Bilbo’s time preserved no knowledge. A love of learning
(other than genealogical lore) was far from general among
them, but there remained still a few in the older families who
studied their own books, and even gathered reports of old
times and distant lands from Elves, Dwarves, and Men. Their
own records began only after the settlement of the Shire, and
their most ancient legends hardly looked further back than
their Wandering Days. It is clear, nonetheless, from these
legends, and from the evidence of their peculiar words and
customs, that like many other folk Hobbits had in the distant
past moved westward. Their earliest tales seem to glimpse a
time when they dwelt in the upper vales of Anduin, between
the eaves of Greenwood the Great and the Misty Mountains.
Why they later undertook the hard and perilous crossing of
the mountains into Eriador is no longer certain. Their own
accounts speak of the multiplying of Men in the land, and of
4 prologue
a shadow that fell on the forest, so that it became darkened
and its new name was Mirkwood.
Before the crossing of the mountains the Hobbits had
already become divided into three somewhat different breeds:
Harfoots, Stoors, and Fallohides. The Harfoots were browner
of skin, smaller, and shorter, and they were beardless and
bootless; their hands and feet were neat and nimble; and they
preferred highlands and hillsides. The Stoors were broader,
heavier in build; their feet and hands were larger; and they
preferred flat lands and riversides. The Fallohides were fairer
of skin and also of hair, and they were taller and slimmer
than the others; they were lovers of trees and of woodlands.
The Harfoots had much to do with Dwarves in ancient
times, and long lived in the foothills of the mountains. They
moved westward early, and roamed over Eriador as far as
Weathertop while the others were still in Wilderland. They
were the most normal and representative variety of Hobbit,
and far the most numerous. They were the most inclined to
settle in one place, and longest preserved their ancestral habit
of living in tunnels and holes.
The Stoors lingered long by the banks of the Great River
Anduin, and were less shy of Men. They came west after the
Harfoots and followed the course of the Loudwater southwards;
and there many of them long dwelt between Tharbad
and the borders of Dunland before they moved north again.
The Fallohides, the least numerous, were a northerly
branch. They were more friendly with Elves than the other
Hobbits were, and had more skill in language and song than
in handicrafts; and of old they preferred hunting to tilling.
They crossed the mountains north of Rivendell and came
down the River Hoarwell. In Eriador they soon mingled with
the other kinds that had preceded them, but being somewhat
bolder and more adventurous, they were often found as
leaders or chieftains among clans of Harfoots or Stoors. Even
in Bilbo’s time the strong Fallohidish strain could still be
noted among the greater families, such as the Tooks and the
Masters of Buckland.
prologue 5
In the westlands of Eriador, between the Misty Mountains
and the Mountains of Lune, the Hobbits found both Men and
Elves. Indeed, a remnant still dwelt there of the Du´ nedain, the
kings of Men that came over the Sea out of Westernesse; but
they were dwindling fast and the lands of their North Kingdom
were falling far and wide into waste. There was room
and to spare for incomers, and ere long the Hobbits began
to settle in ordered communities. Most of their earlier settlements
had long disappeared and been forgotten in Bilbo’s
time; but one of the first to become important still endured,
though reduced in size; this was at Bree and in the Chetwood
that lay round about, some forty miles east of the Shire.
It was in these early days, doubtless, that the Hobbits
learned their letters and began to write after the manner of
the Du´ nedain, who had in their turn long before learned the
art from the Elves. And in those days also they forgot whatever
languages they had used before, and spoke ever after the
Common Speech, the Westron as it was named, that was
current through all the lands of the kings from Arnor to
Gondor, and about all the coasts of the Sea from Belfalas to
Lune. Yet they kept a few words of their own, as well as their
own names of months and days, and a great store of personal
names out of the past.
About this time legend among the Hobbits first becomes
history with a reckoning of years. For it was in the one thousand
six hundred and first year of the Third Age that the
Fallohide brothers, Marcho and Blanco, set out from Bree;
and having obtained permission from the high king at
Fornost,* they crossed the brown river Baranduin with a
great following of Hobbits. They passed over the Bridge of
Stonebows, that had been built in the days of the power of
the North Kingdom, and they took all the land beyond to
dwell in, between the river and the Far Downs. All that was
* As the records of Gondor relate this was Argeleb II, the twentieth
of the Northern line, which came to an end with Arvedui three hundred
years later.
6 prologue
demanded of them was that they should keep the Great
Bridge in repair, and all other bridges and roads, speed the
king’s messengers, and acknowledge his lordship.
Thus began the Shire-reckoning, for the year of the crossing
of the Brandywine (as the Hobbits turned the name) became
Year One of the Shire, and all later dates were reckoned from
it.* At once the western Hobbits fell in love with their new
land, and they remained there, and soon passed once more
out of the history of Men and of Elves. While there was still
a king they were in name his subjects, but they were, in fact,
ruled by their own chieftains and meddled not at all with
events in the world outside. To the last battle at Fornost with
the Witch-lord of Angmar they sent some bowmen to the aid
of the king, or so they maintained, though no tales of Men
record it. But in that war the North Kingdom ended; and
then the Hobbits took the land for their own, and they chose
from their own chiefs a Thain to hold the authority of the
king that was gone. There for a thousand years they were
little troubled by wars, and they prospered and multiplied
after the Dark Plague (S.R. 37) until the disaster of the Long
Winter and the famine that followed it. Many thousands then
perished, but the Days of Dearth (1158–60) were at the time
of this tale long past and the Hobbits had again become
accustomed to plenty. The land was rich and kindly, and
though it had long been deserted when they entered it, it had
before been well tilled, and there the king had once had many
farms, cornlands, vineyards, and woods.
Forty leagues it stretched from the Far Downs to the
Brandywine Bridge, and fifty from the northern moors to
the marshes in the south. The Hobbits named it the Shire,
as the region of the authority of their Thain, and a district
of well-ordered business; and there in that pleasant corner of
the world they plied their well-ordered business of living, and
* Thus, the years of the Third Age in the reckoning of the Elves and
the Du´nedain may be found by adding 1600 to the dates of Shirereckoning.
prologue 7
they heeded less and less the world outside where dark things
moved, until they came to think that peace and plenty were
the rule in Middle-earth and the right of all sensible folk.
They forgot or ignored what little they had ever known of
the Guardians, and of the labours of those that made possible
the long peace of the Shire. They were, in fact, sheltered, but
they had ceased to remember it.
At no time had Hobbits of any kind been warlike, and they
had never fought among themselves. In olden days they had,
of course, been often obliged to fight to maintain themselves
in a hard world; but in Bilbo’s time that was very ancient
history. The last battle, before this story opens, and indeed
the only one that had ever been fought within the borders
of the Shire, was beyond living memory: the Battle of
Greenfields, S.R. 1147, in which Bandobras Took routed an
invasion of Orcs. Even the weathers had grown milder, and
the wolves that had once come ravening out of the North in
bitter white winters were now only a grandfather’s tale. So,
though there was still some store of weapons in the Shire,
these were used mostly as trophies, hanging above hearths or
on walls, or gathered into the museum at Michel Delving.
The Mathom-house it was called; for anything that Hobbits
had no immediate use for, but were unwilling to throw away,
they called a mathom. Their dwellings were apt to become
rather crowded with mathoms, and many of the presents that
passed from hand to hand were of that sort.
Nonetheless, ease and peace had left this people still curiously
tough. They were, if it came to it, difficult to daunt or
to kill; and they were, perhaps, so unwearyingly fond of good
things not least because they could, when put to it, do without
them, and could survive rough handling by grief, foe, or
weather in a way that astonished those who did not know
them well and looked no further than their bellies and their
well-fed faces. Though slow to quarrel, and for sport killing
nothing that lived, they were doughty at bay, and at need
could still handle arms. They shot well with the bow, for they
were keen-eyed and sure at the mark. Not only with bows and
8 prologue
arrows. If any Hobbit stooped for a stone, it was well to get
quickly under cover, as all trespassing beasts knew very well.
All Hobbits had originally lived in holes in the ground, or
so they believed, and in such dwellings they still felt most at
home; but in the course of time they had been obliged to
adopt other forms of abode. Actually in the Shire in Bilbo’s
days it was, as a rule, only the richest and the poorest Hobbits
that maintained the old custom. The poorest went on living
in burrows of the most primitive kind, mere holes indeed,
with only one window or none; while the well-to-do still
constructed more luxurious versions of the simple diggings
of old. But suitable sites for these large and ramifying tunnels
(or smials as they called them) were not everywhere to be
found; and in the flats and the low-lying districts the Hobbits,
as they multiplied, began to build above ground. Indeed, even
in the hilly regions and the older villages, such as Hobbiton
or Tuckborough, or in the chief township of the Shire, Michel
Delving on the White Downs, there were now many houses
of wood, brick, or stone. These were specially favoured by
millers, smiths, ropers, and cartwrights, and others of that
sort; for even when they had holes to live in, Hobbits had
long been accustomed to build sheds and workshops.
The habit of building farmhouses and barns was said to
have begun among the inhabitants of the Marish down by
the Brandywine. The Hobbits of that quarter, the Eastfarthing,
were rather large and heavy-legged, and they wore
dwarf-boots in muddy weather. But they were well known to
be Stoors in a large part of their blood, as indeed was shown
by the down that many grew on their chins. No Harfoot or
Fallohide had any trace of a beard. Indeed, the folk of the
Marish, and of Buckland, east of the River, which they afterwards
occupied, came for the most part later into the Shire
up from south-away; and they still had many peculiar names
and strange words not found elsewhere in the Shire.
It is probable that the craft of building, as many other crafts
beside, was derived from the Du´ nedain. But the Hobbits may
have learned it direct from the Elves, the teachers of Men in
prologue 9
their youth. For the Elves of the High Kindred had not yet
forsaken Middle-earth, and they dwelt still at that time at the
Grey Havens away to the west, and in other places within
reach of the Shire. Three Elf-towers of immemorial age were
still to be seen on the Tower Hills beyond the western
marches. They shone far off in the moonlight. The tallest
was furthest away, standing alone upon a green mound. The
Hobbits of the Westfarthing said that one could see the Sea
from the top of that tower; but no Hobbit had ever been
known to climb it. Indeed, few Hobbits had ever seen or
sailed upon the Sea, and fewer still had ever returned to
report it. Most Hobbits regarded even rivers and small boats
with deep misgivings, and not many of them could swim.
And as the days of the Shire lengthened they spoke less and
less with the Elves, and grew afraid of them, and distrustful
of those that had dealings with them; and the Sea became a
word of fear among them, and a token of death, and they
turned their faces away from the hills in the west.
The craft of building may have come from Elves or Men,
but the Hobbits used it in their own fashion. They did not
go in for towers. Their houses were usually long, low, and
comfortable. The oldest kind were, indeed, no more than
built imitations of smials, thatched with dry grass or straw, or
roofed with turves, and having walls somewhat bulged. That
stage, however, belonged to the early days of the Shire, and
hobbit-building had long since been altered, improved by
devices, learned from Dwarves, or discovered by themselves.
A preference for round windows, and even round doors, was
the chief remaining peculiarity of hobbit-architecture.
The houses and the holes of Shire-hobbits were often large,
and inhabited by large families. (Bilbo and Frodo Baggins
were as bachelors very exceptional, as they were also in many
other ways, such as their friendship with the Elves.) Sometimes,
as in the case of the Tooks of Great Smials, or the
Brandybucks of Brandy Hall, many generations of relatives
lived in (comparative) peace together in one ancestral and
many-tunnelled mansion. All Hobbits were, in any case,
10 prologue
clannish and reckoned up their relationships with great care.
They drew long and elaborate family-trees with innumerable
branches. In dealing with Hobbits it is important to remember
who is related to whom, and in what degree. It would be
impossible in this book to set out a family-tree that included
even the more important members of the more important
families at the time which these tales tell of. The genealogical
trees at the end of the Red Book of Westmarch are a small
book in themselves, and all but Hobbits would find them
exceedingly dull. Hobbits delighted in such things, if they were
accurate: they liked to have books filled with things that they
already knew, set out fair and square with no contradictions.
2
Concerning Pipe-weed
There is another astonishing thing about Hobbits of old that
must be mentioned, an astonishing habit: they imbibed or
inhaled, through pipes of clay or wood, the smoke of the
burning leaves of a herb, which they called pipe-weed or leaf,
a variety probably of Nicotiana. A great deal of mystery
surrounds the origin of this peculiar custom, or ‘art’ as the
Hobbits preferred to call it. All that could be discovered about
it in antiquity was put together by Meriadoc Brandybuck
(later Master of Buckland), and since he and the tobacco of
the Southfarthing play a part in the history that follows, his
remarks in the introduction to his Herblore of the Shire may
be quoted.
‘This,’ he says, ‘is the one art that we can certainly claim
to be our own invention. When Hobbits first began to smoke
is not known, all the legends and family histories take it for
granted; for ages folk in the Shire smoked various herbs, some
fouler, some sweeter. But all accounts agree that Tobold
Hornblower of Longbottom in the Southfarthing first grew
the true pipe-weed in his gardens in the days of Isengrim the
Second, about the year 1070 of Shire-reckoning. The best
prologue 11
home-grown still comes from that district, especially the
varieties now known as Longbottom Leaf, Old Toby, and
Southern Star.
‘How Old Toby came by the plant is not recorded, for to
his dying day he would not tell. He knew much about herbs,
but he was no traveller. It is said that in his youth he went
often to Bree, though he certainly never went further from
the Shire than that. It is thus quite possible that he learned
of this plant in Bree, where now, at any rate, it grows well on
the south slopes of the hill. The Bree-hobbits claim to have
been the first actual smokers of the pipe-weed. They claim,
of course, to have done everything before the people of the
Shire, whom they refer to as ‘‘colonists’’; but in this case their
claim is, I think, likely to be true. And certainly it was from
Bree that the art of smoking the genuine weed spread in
the recent centuries among Dwarves and such other folk,
Rangers, Wizards, or wanderers, as still passed to and fro
through that ancient road-meeting. The home and centre of
the art is thus to be found in the old inn of Bree, The Prancing
Pony, that has been kept by the family of Butterbur from
time beyond record.
‘All the same, observations that I have made on my own
many journeys south have convinced me that the weed itself
is not native to our parts of the world, but came northward
from the lower Anduin, whither it was, I suspect, originally
brought over Sea by the Men of Westernesse. It grows abundantly
in Gondor, and there is richer and larger than in the
North, where it is never found wild, and flourishes only in
warm sheltered places like Longbottom. The Men of Gondor
call it sweet galenas, and esteem it only for the fragrance of its
flowers. From that land it must have been carried up the
Greenway during the long centuries between the coming of
Elendil and our own days. But even the Du´nedain of Gondor
allow us this credit: Hobbits first put it into pipes. Not even
the Wizards first thought of that before we did. Though one
Wizard that I knew took up the art long ago, and became as
skilful in it as in all other things that he put his mind to.’
12 prologue
3
Of the Ordering of the Shire
The Shire was divided into four quarters, the Farthings
already referred to, North, South, East, and West; and these
again each into a number of folklands, which still bore the
names of some of the old leading families, although by the
time of this history these names were no longer found only
in their proper folklands. Nearly all Tooks still lived in the
Tookland, but that was not true of many other families, such
as the Bagginses or the Boffins. Outside the Farthings were
the East and West Marches: the Buckland (p. 129); and the
Westmarch added to the Shire in S.R. 1452.
The Shire at this time had hardly any ‘government’.
Families for the most part managed their own affairs. Growing
food and eating it occupied most of their time. In
other matters they were, as a rule, generous and not greedy,
but contented and moderate, so that estates, farms, workshops,
and small trades tended to remain unchanged for
generations.
There remained, of course, the ancient tradition concerning
the high king at Fornost, or Norbury as they called it,
away north of the Shire. But there had been no king for nearly
a thousand years, and even the ruins of Kings’ Norbury were
covered with grass. Yet the Hobbits still said of wild folk and
wicked things (such as trolls) that they had not heard of the
king. For they attributed to the king of old all their essential
laws; and usually they kept the laws of free will, because they
were The Rules (as they said), both ancient and just.
It is true that the Took family had long been pre-eminent;
for the office of Thain had passed to them (from the Oldbucks)
some centuries before, and the chief Took had borne
that title ever since. The Thain was the master of the Shiremoot,
and captain of the Shire-muster and the Hobbitry-inarms;
but as muster and moot were only held in times of
emergency, which no longer occurred, the Thainship had
ceased to be more than a nominal dignity. The Took family
prologue 13
was still, indeed, accorded a special respect, for it remained
both numerous and exceedingly wealthy, and was liable to
produce in every generation strong characters of peculiar
habits and even adventurous temperament. The latter qualities,
however, were now rather tolerated (in the rich) than
generally approved. The custom endured, nonetheless, of
referring to the head of the family as The Took, and of
adding to his name, if required, a number: such as Isengrim
the Second, for instance.
The only real official in the Shire at this date was the Mayor
of Michel Delving (or of the Shire), who was elected every
seven years at the Free Fair on the White Downs at the Lithe,
that is at Midsummer. As mayor almost his only duty was
to preside at banquets, given on the Shire-holidays, which
occurred at frequent intervals. But the offices of Postmaster
and First Shirriff were attached to the mayoralty, so that he
managed both the Messenger Service and the Watch. These
were the only Shire-services, and the Messengers were the
most numerous, and much the busier of the two. By no
means all Hobbits were lettered, but those who were wrote
constantly to all their friends (and a selection of their
relations) who lived further off than an afternoon’s walk.
The Shirriffs was the name that the Hobbits gave to their
police, or the nearest equivalent that they possessed. They
had, of course, no uniforms (such things being quite unknown),
only a feather in their caps; and they were in practice
rather haywards than policemen, more concerned with the
strayings of beasts than of people. There were in all the Shire
only twelve of them, three in each Farthing, for Inside Work.
A rather larger body, varying at need, was employed to ‘beat
the bounds’, and to see that Outsiders of any kind, great or
small, did not make themselves a nuisance.
At the time when this story begins the Bounders, as they
were called, had been greatly increased. There were many
reports and complaints of strange persons and creatures
prowling about the borders, or over them: the first sign that
all was not quite as it should be, and always had been except
14 prologue
in tales and legends of long ago. Few heeded the sign, and
not even Bilbo yet had any notion of what it portended. Sixty
years had passed since he set out on his memorable journey,
and he was old even for Hobbits, who reached a hundred
as often as not; but much evidently still remained of the
considerable wealth that he had brought back. How much or
how little he revealed to no one, not even to Frodo his favourite
‘nephew’. And he still kept secret the ring that he had
found.
4
Of the Finding of the Ring
As is told in The Hobbit, there came one day to Bilbo’s door the
great Wizard, Gandalf the Grey, and thirteen dwarves with
him: none other, indeed, than Thorin Oakenshield, descendant
of kings, and his twelve companions in exile. With them
he set out, to his own lasting astonishment, on a morning of
April, it being then the year 1341 Shire-reckoning, on a quest
of great treasure, the dwarf-hoards of the Kings under the
Mountain, beneath Erebor in Dale, far off in the East. The
quest was successful, and the Dragon that guarded the hoard
was destroyed. Yet, though before all was won the Battle of
Five Armies was fought, and Thorin was slain, and many
deeds of renown were done, the matter would scarcely have
concerned later history, or earned more than a note in
the long annals of the Third Age, but for an ‘accident’ by the
way. The party was assailed by Orcs in a high pass of the
Misty Mountains as they went towards Wilderland; and so it
happened that Bilbo was lost for a while in the black orcmines
deep under the mountains, and there, as he groped in
vain in the dark, he put his hand on a ring, lying on the floor
of a tunnel. He put it in his pocket. It seemed then like mere
luck.
Trying to find his way out, Bilbo went on down to the
roots of the mountains, until he could go no further. At the
prologue 15
bottom of the tunnel lay a cold lake far from the light, and
on an island of rock in the water lived Gollum. He was a
loathsome little creature: he paddled a small boat with his
large flat feet, peering with pale luminous eyes and catching
blind fish with his long fingers, and eating them raw. He ate
any living thing, even orc, if he could catch it and strangle it
without a struggle. He possessed a secret treasure that had
come to him long ages ago, when he still lived in the light: a
ring of gold that made its wearer invisible. It was the one
thing he loved, his ‘Precious’, and he talked to it, even when
it was not with him. For he kept it hidden safe in a hole on
his island, except when he was hunting or spying on the orcs
of the mines.
Maybe he would have attacked Bilbo at once, if the ring
had been on him when they met; but it was not, and the
hobbit held in his hand an Elvish knife, which served him as
a sword. So to gain time Gollum challenged Bilbo to the
Riddle-game, saying that if he asked a riddle which Bilbo
could not guess, then he would kill him and eat him; but if
Bilbo defeated him, then he would do as Bilbo wished: he
would lead him to a way out of the tunnels.
Since he was lost in the dark without hope, and could
neither go on nor back, Bilbo accepted the challenge; and
they asked one another many riddles. In the end Bilbo won
the game, more by luck (as it seemed) than by wits; for he
was stumped at last for a riddle to ask, and cried out, as his
hand came upon the ring he had picked up and forgotten:
What have I got in my pocket? This Gollum failed to answer,
though he demanded three guesses.
The Authorities, it is true, differ whether this last question
was a mere ‘question’ and not a ‘riddle’ according to the strict
rules of the Game; but all agree that, after accepting it and
trying to guess the answer, Gollum was bound by his
promise. And Bilbo pressed him to keep his word; for the
thought came to him that this slimy creature might prove
false, even though such promises were held sacred, and of
old all but the wickedest things feared to break them. But
16 prologue
after ages alone in the dark Gollum’s heart was black, and
treachery was in it. He slipped away, and returned to his
island, of which Bilbo knew nothing, not far off in the dark
water. There, he thought, lay his ring. He was hungry now,
and angry, and once his ‘Precious’ was with him he would
not fear any weapon at all.
But the ring was not on the island; he had lost it, it was
gone. His screech sent a shiver down Bilbo’s back, though he
did not yet understand what had happened. But Gollum had
at last leaped to a guess, too late. What has it got in its
pocketses? he cried. The light in his eyes was like a green
flame as he sped back to murder the hobbit and recover his
‘Precious’. Just in time Bilbo saw his peril, and he fled blindly
up the passage away from the water; and once more he was
saved by his luck. For as he ran he put his hand in his pocket,
and the ring slipped quietly on to his finger. So it was that
Gollum passed him without seeing him, and went to guard
the way out, lest the ‘thief ’ should escape. Warily Bilbo followed
him, as he went along, cursing, and talking to himself
about his ‘Precious’; from which talk at last even Bilbo
guessed the truth, and hope came to him in the darkness: he
himself had found the marvellous ring and a chance of escape
from the orcs and from Gollum.
At length they came to a halt before an unseen opening
that led to the lower gates of the mines, on the eastward side
of the mountains. There Gollum crouched at bay, smelling
and listening; and Bilbo was tempted to slay him with his
sword. But pity stayed him, and though he kept the ring, in
which his only hope lay, he would not use it to help him kill
the wretched creature at a disadvantage. In the end, gathering
his courage, he leaped over Gollum in the dark, and fled
away down the passage, pursued by his enemy’s cries of hate
and despair: Thief, thief ! Baggins! We hates it for ever!
Now it is a curious fact that this is not the story as Bilbo
first told it to his companions. To them his account was that
Gollum had promised to give him a present, if he won the
prologue 17
game; but when Gollum went to fetch it from his island he
found the treasure was gone: a magic ring, which had been
given to him long ago on his birthday. Bilbo guessed that this
was the very ring that he had found, and as he had won the
game, it was already his by right. But being in a tight place,
he said nothing about it, and made Gollum show him the
way out, as a reward instead of a present. This account Bilbo
set down in his memoirs, and he seems never to have altered
it himself, not even after the Council of Elrond. Evidently it
still appeared in the original Red Book, as it did in several of
the copies and abstracts. But many copies contain the true
account (as an alternative), derived no doubt from notes by
Frodo or Samwise, both of whom learned the truth, though
they seem to have been unwilling to delete anything actually
written by the old hobbit himself.
Gandalf, however, disbelieved Bilbo’s first story, as soon
as he heard it, and he continued to be very curious about the
ring. Eventually he got the true tale out of Bilbo after much
questioning, which for a while strained their friendship; but
the wizard seemed to think the truth important. Though he
did not say so to Bilbo, he also thought it important, and
disturbing, to find that the good hobbit had not told the
truth from the first: quite contrary to his habit. The idea of a
‘present’ was not mere hobbitlike invention, all the same. It
was suggested to Bilbo, as he confessed, by Gollum’s talk
that he overheard; for Gollum did, in fact, call the ring his
‘birthday-present’, many times. That also Gandalf thought
strange and suspicious; but he did not discover the truth
in this point for many more years, as will be seen in this
book.
Of Bilbo’s later adventures little more need be said here.
With the help of the ring he escaped from the orc-guards at
the gate and rejoined his companions. He used the ring many
times on his quest, chiefly for the help of his friends; but he
kept it secret from them as long as he could. After his return
to his home he never spoke of it again to anyone, save Gandalf
18 note on the shire records
and Frodo; and no one else in the Shire knew of its existence,
or so he believed. Only to Frodo did he show the account of
his Journey that he was writing.
His sword, Sting, Bilbo hung over his fireplace, and his
coat of marvellous mail, the gift of the Dwarves from the
Dragon-hoard, he lent to a museum, to the Michel Delving
Mathom-house in fact. But he kept in a drawer at Bag End
the old cloak and hood that he had worn on his travels;
and the ring, secured by a fine chain, remained in his
pocket.
He returned to his home at Bag End on June the 22nd in
his fifty-second year (S.R. 1342), and nothing very notable
occurred in the Shire until Mr. Baggins began the preparations
for the celebration of his hundred-and-eleventh
birthday (S.R. 1401). At this point this History begins.
note on the shire records
At the end of the Third Age the part played by the Hobbits
in the great events that led to the inclusion of the Shire in the
Reunited Kingdom awakened among them a more widespread
interest in their own history; and many of their traditions,
up to that time still mainly oral, were collected and
written down. The greater families were also concerned with
events in the Kingdom at large, and many of their members
studied its ancient histories and legends. By the end of the
first century of the Fourth Age there were already to be found
in the Shire several libraries that contained many historical
books and records.
The largest of these collections were probably at Undertowers,
at Great Smials, and at Brandy Hall. This account of
the end of the Third Age is drawn mainly from the Red Book
of Westmarch. That most important source for the history
of the War of the Ring was so called because it was long
preserved at Undertowers, the home of the Fairbairns,
note on the shire records 19
Wardens of the Westmarch.* It was in origin Bilbo’s private
diary, which he took with him to Rivendell. Frodo brought it
back to the Shire, together with many loose leaves of notes,
and during S.R. 1420–1 he nearly filled its pages with his
account of the War. But annexed to it and preserved with it,
probably in a single red case, were the three large volumes,
bound in red leather, that Bilbo gave to him as a parting gift.
To these four volumes there was added in Westmarch a
fifth containing commentaries, genealogies, and various other
matter concerning the hobbit members of the Fellowship.
The original Red Book has not been preserved, but many
copies were made, especially of the first volume, for the use
of the descendants of the children of Master Samwise. The
most important copy, however, has a different history. It was
kept at Great Smials, but it was written in Gondor, probably
at the request of the great-grandson of Peregrin, and completed
in S.R. 1592 (F.A. 172). Its southern scribe appended
this note: Findegil, King’s Writer, finished this work in IV
172. It is an exact copy in all details of the Thain’s Book in
Minas Tirith. That book was a copy, made at the request of
King Elessar, of the Red Book of the Periannath, and was
brought to him by the Thain Peregrin when he retired to
Gondor in IV 64.
The Thain’s Book was thus the first copy made of the Red
Book and contained much that was later omitted or lost. In
Minas Tirith it received much annotation, and many corrections,
especially of names, words, and quotations in the Elvish
languages; and there was added to it an abbreviated version
of those parts of The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen which lie
outside the account of the War. The full tale is stated to have
been written by Barahir, grandson of the Steward Faramir,
some time after the passing of the King. But the chief importance
of Findegil’s copy is that it alone contains the whole of
Bilbo’s ‘Translations from the Elvish’. These three volumes
* See Appendix B: annals 1451, 1462, 1482; and note at end of
Appendix C.
20 note on the shire records
were found to be a work of great skill and learning in which,
between 1403 and 1418, he had used all the sources available
to him in Rivendell, both living and written. But since they
were little used by Frodo, being almost entirely concerned
with the Elder Days, no more is said of them here.
Since Meriadoc and Peregrin became the heads of their
great families, and at the same time kept up their connexions
with Rohan and Gondor, the libraries at Bucklebury and
Tuckborough contained much that did not appear in the Red
Book. In Brandy Hall there were many works dealing with
Eriador and the history of Rohan. Some of these were
composed or begun by Meriadoc himself, though in the Shire
he was chiefly remembered for his Herblore of the Shire, and
for his Reckoning of Years in which he discussed the relation
of the calendars of the Shire and Bree to those of Rivendell,
Gondor, and Rohan. He also wrote a short treatise on Old
Words and Names in the Shire, showing special interest in
discovering the kinship with the language of the Rohirrim
of such ‘shire-words’ as mathom and old elements in place
names.
At Great Smials the books were of less interest to Shirefolk,
though more important for larger history. None of them
was written by Peregrin, but he and his successors collected
many manuscripts written by scribes of Gondor: mainly
copies or summaries of histories or legends relating to Elendil
and his heirs. Only here in the Shire were to be found extensive
materials for the history of Nu´menor and the arising of
Sauron. It was probably at Great Smials that The Tale of
Years* was put together, with the assistance of material
collected by Meriadoc. Though the dates given are often
conjectural, especially for the Second Age, they deserve attention.
It is probable that Meriadoc obtained assistance and
information from Rivendell, which he visited more than once.
There, though Elrond had departed, his sons long remained,
* Represented in much reduced form in Appendix B as far as the
end of the Third Age.
note on the shire records 21
together with some of the High-elven folk. It is said that
Celeborn went to dwell there after the departure of Galadriel;
but there is no record of the day when at last he sought the
Grey Havens, and with him went the last living memory of
the Elder Days in Middle-earth.
The talk did not die down in nine or even ninety-nine days.
The second disappearance of Mr. Bilbo Baggins was discussed
in Hobbiton, and indeed all over the Shire, for a year
and a day, and was remembered much longer than that. It
became a fireside-story for young hobbits; and eventually
Mad Baggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a flash
and reappear with bags of jewels and gold, became a favourite
character of legend and lived on long after all the true events
were forgotten.
But in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbourhood
was that Bilbo, who had always been rather cracked,
had at last gone quite mad, and had run off into the Blue.
There he had undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a river and
come to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end. The blame
was mostly laid on Gandalf.
‘If only that dratted wizard will leave young Frodo alone,
perhaps he’ll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense,’ they
said. And to all appearance the wizard did leave Frodo alone,
and he did settle down, but the growth of hobbit-sense was
not very noticeable. Indeed, he at once began to carry on
Bilbo’s reputation for oddity. He refused to go into mourning;
and the next year he gave a party in honour of Bilbo’s
hundred-and-twelfth birthday, which he called a Hundredweight
Feast. But that was short of the mark, for twenty
guests were invited and there were several meals at which it
snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say.
Some people were rather shocked; but Frodo kept up the
custom of giving Bilbo’s Birthday Party year after year until
they got used to it. He said that he did not think Bilbo was
56 the fellowship of the ring
dead. When they asked: ‘Where is he then?’ he shrugged his
shoulders.
He lived alone, as Bilbo had done; but he had a good
many friends, especially among the younger hobbits (mostly
descendants of the Old Took) who had as children been fond
of Bilbo and often in and out of Bag End. Folco Boffin and
Fredegar Bolger were two of these; but his closest friends
were Peregrin Took (usually called Pippin), and Merry
Brandybuck (his real name was Meriadoc, but that was
seldom remembered). Frodo went tramping over the Shire
with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to
the amazement of sensible folk he was sometimes seen far
from home walking in the hills and woods under the starlight.
Merry and Pippin suspected that he visited the Elves at times,
as Bilbo had done.
As time went on, people began to notice that Frodo also
showed signs of good ‘preservation’: outwardly he retained
the appearance of a robust and energetic hobbit just out of
his tweens. ‘Some folk have all the luck,’ they said; but it was
not until Frodo approached the usually more sober age of
fifty that they began to think it queer.
Frodo himself, after the first shock, found that being his own
master and the Mr. Baggins of Bag End was rather pleasant.
For some years he was quite happy and did not worry much
about the future. But half unknown to himself the regret that
he had not gone with Bilbo was steadily growing. He found
himself wondering at times, especially in the autumn, about
the wild lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had
never seen came into his dreams. He began to say to himself:
‘Perhaps I shall cross the River myself one day.’ To which
the other half of his mind always replied: ‘Not yet.’
So it went on, until his forties were running out, and his
fiftieth birthday was drawing near: fifty was a number that
he felt was somehow significant (or ominous); it was at any
rate at that age that adventure had suddenly befallen Bilbo.
Frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths seemed too
the shadow of the past 57
well-trodden. He looked at maps, and wondered what lay
beyond their edges: maps made in the Shire showed mostly
white spaces beyond its borders. He took to wandering
further afield and more often by himself; and Merry and
his other friends watched him anxiously. Often he was seen
walking and talking with the strange wayfarers that began at
this time to appear in the Shire.
There were rumours of strange things happening in the
world outside; and as Gandalf had not at that time appeared or
sent any message for several years, Frodo gathered all the news
he could. Elves, who seldom walked in the Shire, could now
be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening,
passing and not returning; but they were leaving Middle-earth
and were no longer concerned with its troubles. There were,
however, dwarves on the road in unusual numbers. The
ancient East–West Road ran through the Shire to its end at the
Grey Havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to
their mines in the Blue Mountains. They were the hobbits’
chief source of news from distant parts – if they wanted any: as
a rule dwarves said little and hobbits asked no more. But now
Frodo often met strange dwarves of far countries, seeking
refuge in the West. They were troubled, and some spoke in
whispers of the Enemy and of the Land of Mordor.
That name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark
past, like a shadow in the background of their memories; but
it was ominous and disquieting. It seemed that the evil power
in Mirkwood had been driven out by the White Council
only to reappear in greater strength in the old strongholds of
Mordor. The Dark Tower had been rebuilt, it was said. From
there the power was spreading far and wide, and away far
east and south there were wars and growing fear. Orcs were
multiplying again in the mountains. Trolls were abroad, no
longer dull-witted, but cunning and armed with dreadful
weapons. And there were murmured hints of creatures more
terrible than all these, but they had no name.
* * *
58 the fellowship of the ring
Little of all this, of course, reached the ears of ordinary
hobbits. But even the deafest and most stay-at-home began
to hear queer tales; and those whose business took them to the
borders saw strange things. The conversation in The Green
Dragon at Bywater, one evening in the spring of Frodo’s
fiftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the
Shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still
laughed at them.
Sam Gamgee was sitting in one corner near the fire, and
opposite him was Ted Sandyman, the miller’s son; and there
were various other rustic hobbits listening to their talk.
‘Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,’ said Sam.
‘Ah,’ said Ted, ‘you do, if you listen. But I can hear firesidetales
and children’s stories at home, if I want to.’
‘No doubt you can,’ retorted Sam, ‘and I daresay there’s
more truth in some of them than you reckon. Who invented
the stories anyway? Take dragons now.’
‘No thank ’ee,’ said Ted, ‘I won’t. I heard tell of them
when I was a youngster, but there’s no call to believe in them
now. There’s only one Dragon in Bywater, and that’s Green,’
he said, getting a general laugh.
‘All right,’ said Sam, laughing with the rest. ‘But what
about these Tree-men, these giants, as you might call them?
They do say that one bigger than a tree was seen up away
beyond the North Moors not long back.’
‘Who’s they?’
‘My cousin Hal for one. He works for Mr. Boffin at
Overhill and goes up to the Northfarthing for the hunting.
He saw one.’
‘Says he did, perhaps. Your Hal’s always saying he’s seen
things; and maybe he sees things that ain’t there.’
‘But this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking –
walking seven yards to a stride, if it was an inch.’
‘Then I bet it wasn’t an inch. What he saw was an elm tree,
as like as not.’
‘But this one was walking, I tell you; and there ain’t no elm
tree on the North Moors.’
the shadow of the past 59
‘Then Hal can’t have seen one,’ said Ted. There was some
laughing and clapping: the audience seemed to think that
Ted had scored a point.
‘All the same,’ said Sam, ‘you can’t deny that others besides
our Halfast have seen queer folk crossing the Shire – crossing
it, mind you: there are more that are turned back at the
borders. The Bounders have never been so busy before.
‘And I’ve heard tell that Elves are moving west. They do
say they are going to the harbours, out away beyond the
White Towers.’ Sam waved his arm vaguely: neither he nor
any of them knew how far it was to the Sea, past the old
towers beyond the western borders of the Shire. But it was
an old tradition that away over there stood the Grey Havens,
from which at times elven-ships set sail, never to return.
‘They are sailing, sailing, sailing over the Sea, they are
going into the West and leaving us,’ said Sam, half chanting
the words, shaking his head sadly and solemnly. But Ted
laughed.
‘Well, that isn’t anything new, if you believe the old tales.
And I don’t see what it matters to me or you. Let them sail!
But I warrant you haven’t seen them doing it; nor anyone
else in the Shire.’
‘Well, I don’t know,’ said Sam thoughtfully. He believed
he had once seen an Elf in the woods, and still hoped to see
more one day. Of all the legends that he had heard in his
early years such fragments of tales and half-remembered
stories about the Elves as the hobbits knew, had always moved
him most deeply. ‘There are some, even in these parts, as
know the Fair Folk and get news of them,’ he said. ‘There’s
Mr. Baggins now, that I work for. He told me that they were
sailing and he knows a bit about Elves. And old Mr. Bilbo knew
more: many’s the talk I had with him when I was a little lad.’
‘Oh, they’re both cracked,’ said Ted. ‘Leastways old Bilbo
was cracked, and Frodo’s cracking. If that’s where you get
your news from, you’ll never want for moonshine. Well,
friends, I’m off home. Your good health!’ He drained his
mug and went out noisily.
60 the fellowship of the ring
Sam sat silent and said no more. He had a good deal to
think about. For one thing, there was a lot to do up in the
Bag End garden, and he would have a busy day tomorrow,
if the weather cleared. The grass was growing fast. But Sam
had more on his mind than gardening. After a while he
sighed, and got up and went out.
It was early April and the sky was now clearing after heavy
rain. The sun was down, and a cool pale evening was quietly
fading into night. He walked home under the early stars
through Hobbiton and up the Hill, whistling softly and
thoughtfully.
It was just at this time that Gandalf reappeared after his long
absence. For three years after the Party he had been away.
Then he paid Frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look
at him he went off again. During the next year or two he had
turned up fairly often, coming unexpectedly after dusk, and
going off without warning before sunrise. He would not
discuss his own business and journeys, and seemed chiefly
interested in small news about Frodo’s health and doings.
Then suddenly his visits had ceased. It was over nine years
since Frodo had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to
think that the wizard would never return and had given up
all interest in hobbits. But that evening, as Sam was walking
home and twilight was fading, there came the once familiar
tap on the study window.
Frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great
delight. They looked hard at one another.
‘All well eh?’ said Gandalf. ‘You look the same as ever,
Frodo!’
‘So do you,’ Frodo replied; but secretly he thought that
Gandalf looked older and more careworn. He pressed him
for news of himself and of the wide world, and soon they
were deep in talk, and they stayed up far into the night.
Next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting
with Frodo by the open window of the study. A bright fire
the shadow of the past 61
was on the hearth, but the sun was warm, and the wind was
in the South. Everything looked fresh, and the new green of
spring was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the
trees’ fingers.
Gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years
before, when Bilbo had run out of Bag End without a handkerchief.
His hair was perhaps whiter than it had been then,
and his beard and eyebrows were perhaps longer, and his
face more lined with care and wisdom; but his eyes were as
bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke-rings with the
same vigour and delight.
He was smoking now in silence, for Frodo was sitting still,
deep in thought. Even in the light of morning he felt the dark
shadow of the tidings that Gandalf had brought. At last he
broke the silence.
‘Last night you began to tell me strange things about my
ring, Gandalf,’ he said. ‘And then you stopped, because you
said that such matters were best left until daylight. Don’t you
think you had better finish now? You say the ring is dangerous,
far more dangerous than I guess. In what way?’
‘In many ways,’ answered the wizard. ‘It is far more powerful
than I ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the
end it would utterly overcome anyone of mortal race who
possessed it. It would possess him.
‘In Eregion long ago many Elven-rings were made, magic
rings as you call them, and they were, of course, of various
kinds: some more potent and some less. The lesser rings were
only essays in the craft before it was full-grown, and to the
Elven-smiths they were but trifles – yet still to my mind
dangerous for mortals. But the Great Rings, the Rings of
Power, they were perilous.
‘A mortal, Frodo, who keeps one of the Great Rings, does
not die, but he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely
continues, until at last every minute is a weariness. And if
he often uses the Ring to make himself invisible, he fades: he
becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks in the
twilight under the eye of the Dark Power that rules the Rings.
62 the fellowship of the ring
Yes, sooner or later – later, if he is strong or well-meaning to
begin with, but neither strength nor good purpose will last –
sooner or later the Dark Power will devour him.’
‘How terrifying!’ said Frodo. There was another long
silence. The sound of Sam Gamgee cutting the lawn came
in from the garden.
‘How long have you known this?’ asked Frodo at length.
‘And how much did Bilbo know?’
‘Bilbo knew no more than he told you, I am sure,’ said
Gandalf. ‘He would certainly never have passed on to you
anything that he thought would be a danger, even though I
promised to look after you. He thought the ring was very
beautiful, and very useful at need; and if anything was wrong
or queer, it was himself. He said that it was ‘‘growing on his
mind’’, and he was always worrying about it; but he did not
suspect that the ring itself was to blame. Though he had
found out that the thing needed looking after; it did not seem
always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded in
an odd way, and might suddenly slip off a finger where it
had been tight.’
‘Yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,’ said Frodo,
‘so I have always kept it on its chain.’
‘Very wise,’ said Gandalf. ‘But as for his long life, Bilbo
never connected it with the ring at all. He took all the credit
for that to himself, and he was very proud of it. Though he
was getting restless and uneasy. Thin and stretched he said.
A sign that the ring was getting control.’
‘How long have you known all this?’ asked Frodo again.
‘Known?’ said Gandalf. ‘I have known much that only the
Wise know, Frodo. But if you mean ‘‘known about this ring’’,
well, I still do not know, one might say. There is a last test to
make. But I no longer doubt my guess.
‘When did I first begin to guess?’ he mused, searching back
in memory. ‘Let me see – it was in the year that the White
Council drove the Dark Power from Mirkwood, just before
the Battle of Five Armies, that Bilbo found his ring. A shadow
the shadow of the past 63
fell on my heart then, though I did not know yet what I
feared. I wondered often how Gollum came by a Great Ring,
as plainly it was – that at least was clear from the first. Then
I heard Bilbo’s strange story of how he had ‘‘won’’ it, and I
could not believe it. When I at last got the truth out of him,
I saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to the
ring beyond doubt. Much like Gollum with his ‘‘birthdaypresent’’.
The lies were too much alike for my comfort.
Clearly the ring had an unwholesome power that set to work
on its keeper at once. That was the first real warning I had
that all was not well. I told Bilbo often that such rings were
better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry.
There was little else that I could do. I could not take it from
him without doing greater harm; and I had no right to do so
anyway. I could only watch and wait. I might perhaps have
consulted Saruman the White, but something always held
me back.’
‘Who is he?’ asked Frodo. ‘I have never heard of him
before.’
‘Maybe not,’ answered Gandalf. ‘Hobbits are, or were, no
concern of his. Yet he is great among the Wise. He is the
chief of my order and the head of the Council. His knowledge
is deep, but his pride has grown with it, and he takes ill any
meddling. The lore of the Elven-rings, great and small, is his
province. He has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of
their making; but when the Rings were debated in the Council,
all that he would reveal to us of his ring-lore told against
my fears. So my doubt slept – but uneasily. Still I watched
and I waited.
‘And all seemed well with Bilbo. And the years passed.
Yes, they passed, and they seemed not to touch him. He
showed no signs of age. The shadow fell on me again. But I
said to myself: ‘‘After all he comes of a long-lived family on
his mother’s side. There is time yet. Wait!’’
‘And I waited. Until that night when he left this house. He
said and did things then that filled me with a fear that no
words of Saruman could allay. I knew at last that something
64 the fellowship of the ring
dark and deadly was at work. And I have spent most of the
years since then in finding out the truth of it.’
‘There wasn’t any permanent harm done, was there?’ asked
Frodo anxiously. ‘He would get all right in time, wouldn’t
he? Be able to rest in peace, I mean?’
‘He felt better at once,’ said Gandalf. ‘But there is only one
Power in this world that knows all about the Rings and their
effects; and as far as I know there is no Power in the world
that knows all about hobbits. Among the Wise I am the
only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch of
knowledge, but full of surprises. Soft as butter they can be,
and yet sometimes as tough as old tree-roots. I think it likely
that some would resist the Rings far longer than most of
the Wise would believe. I don’t think you need worry about
Bilbo.
‘Of course, he possessed the ring for many years, and used
it, so it might take a long while for the influence to wear off
– before it was safe for him to see it again, for instance.
Otherwise, he might live on for years, quite happily: just stop
as he was when he parted with it. For he gave it up in the
end of his own accord: an important point. No, I was not
troubled about dear Bilbo any more, once he had let the thing
go. It is for you that I feel responsible.
‘Ever since Bilbo left I have been deeply concerned about
you, and about all these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits.
It would be a grievous blow to the world, if the Dark Power
overcame the Shire; if all your kind, jolly, stupid Bolgers,
Hornblowers, Boffins, Bracegirdles, and the rest, not to
mention the ridiculous Bagginses, became enslaved.’
Frodo shuddered. ‘But why should we be?’ he asked. ‘And
why should he want such slaves?’
‘To tell you the truth,’ replied Gandalf, ‘I believe that
hitherto – hitherto, mark you – he has entirely overlooked
the existence of hobbits. You should be thankful. But your
safety has passed. He does not need you – he has many
more useful servants – but he won’t forget you again. And
hobbits as miserable slaves would please him far more than
the shadow of the past 65
hobbits happy and free. There is such a thing as malice and
revenge.’
‘Revenge?’ said Frodo. ‘Revenge for what? I still don’t
understand what all this has to do with Bilbo and myself, and
our ring.’
‘It has everything to do with it,’ said Gandalf. ‘You do not
know the real peril yet; but you shall. I was not sure of it
myself when I was last here; but the time has come to speak.
Give me the ring for a moment.’
Frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was
clasped to a chain that hung from his belt. He unfastened it
and handed it slowly to the wizard. It felt suddenly very
heavy, as if either it or Frodo himself was in some way reluctant
for Gandalf to touch it.
Gandalf held it up. It looked to be made of pure and solid
gold. ‘Can you see any markings on it?’ he asked.
‘No,’ said Frodo. ‘There are none. It is quite plain, and it
never shows a scratch or sign of wear.’
‘Well then, look!’ To Frodo’s astonishment and distress
the wizard threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing
corner of the fire. Frodo gave a cry and groped for the tongs;
but Gandalf held him back.
‘Wait!’ he said in a commanding voice, giving Frodo a
quick look from under his bristling brows.
No apparent change came over the ring. After a while
Gandalf got up, closed the shutters outside the window, and
drew the curtains. The room became dark and silent, though
the clack of Sam’s shears, now nearer to the windows, could
still be heard faintly from the garden. For a moment the
wizard stood looking at the fire; then he stooped and removed
the ring to the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it
up. Frodo gasped.
‘It is quite cool,’ said Gandalf. ‘Take it!’ Frodo received it
on his shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and
heavier than ever.
‘Hold it up!’ said Gandalf. ‘And look closely!’
66 the fellowship of the ring
As Frodo did so, he now saw fine lines, finer than the finest
pen-strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines
of fire that seemed to form the letters of a flowing script.
They shone piercingly bright, and yet remote, as if out of a